
Neuron
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about cells in the nervous system. For other uses, see Neuron
(disambiguation).  "Brain cell" redirects here. For other uses, see Glial cell.

Neuron
PurkinjeCell.jpg
Drawing of neurons in the pigeon cerebellum, by Spanish neuroscientist Santiago
Ramón y Cajal in 1899. (A) denotes Purkinje cells and (B) denotes granule
cells, both of which are multipolar.

Identifiers
MeSH 	D009474
NeuroLex ID 	sao1417703748
TA 	A14.0.00.002
TH 	H2.00.06.1.00002
FMA 	56566
Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]

A neuron (/ˈnjʊərɒn/ NYEWR-on or /ˈnʊərɒn/ NEWR-on, also known as a neurone[1]
or nerve cell) is an electrically excitable cell that processes and transmits
information through electrical and chemical signals. These signals between
neurons occur via synapses, specialized connections with other cells. Neurons
can connect to each other to form neural networks. Neurons are the core
components of the brain and spinal cord of the central nervous system (CNS),
and of the ganglia of the peripheral nervous system (PNS).[citation
needed][clarification needed]

There are several types of specialized neurons.[citation needed] Sensory
neurons respond to stimuli such as touch, sound or light and all other stimuli
affecting the cells of the sensory organs that then send signals to the spinal
cord and brain.[citation needed] Motor neurons receive signals from the brain
and spinal cord to cause muscle contractions and affect glandular
outputs.[citation needed] Interneurons connect neurons to other neurons within
the same region of the brain, or spinal cord in neural networks.[citation
needed]

A typical neuron consists of a cell body (soma), dendrites, and an axon. The
term neurite is used to describe either a dendrite or an axon, particularly in
its undifferentiated stage. Dendrites are thin structures that arise from the
cell body, often extending for hundreds of micrometres and branching multiple
times, giving rise to a complex "dendritic tree". An axon (also called a nerve
fiber when myelinated) is a special cellular extension (process) that arises
from the cell body at a site called the axon hillock and travels for a
distance, as far as 1 meter in humans or even more in other species. Nerve
fibers are often bundled into fascicles, and in the peripheral nervous system,
bundles of fascicles make up nerves (like strands of wire make up cables). The
cell body of a neuron frequently gives rise to multiple dendrites, but never to
more than one axon, although the axon may branch hundreds of times before it
terminates. At the majority of synapses, signals are sent from the axon of one
neuron to a dendrite of another. There are, however, many exceptions to these
rules: for example, neurons can lack dendrites, or have no axon, and synapses
can connect an axon to another axon or a dendrite to another dendrite.

All neurons are electrically excitable, maintaining voltage gradients across
their membranes by means of metabolically driven ion pumps, which combine with
ion channels embedded in the membrane to generate
intracellular-versus-extracellular concentration differences of ions such as
sodium, potassium, chloride, and calcium. Changes in the cross-membrane voltage
can alter the function of voltage-dependent ion channels. If the voltage
changes by a large enough amount, an all-or-none electrochemical pulse called
an action potential is generated, which travels rapidly along the cell's axon,
and activates synaptic connections with other cells when it arrives.

In most cases, neurons are generated by special types of stem cells. Neurons in
the adult brain generally do not undergo cell division. Astrocytes are
star-shaped glial cells that have also been observed to turn into neurons by
virtue of the stem cell characteristic pluripotency. Neurogenesis largely
ceases during adulthood in most areas of the brain.[citation needed] However,
there is strong evidence for generation of substantial numbers of new neurons
in two brain areas, the hippocampus and olfactory bulb.[2][3]

Contents

    1 Overview
    2 Anatomy and histology
        2.1 Histology and internal structure
    3 Classification
        3.1 Structural classification
            3.1.1 Polarity
            3.1.2 Other
        3.2 Functional classification
            3.2.1 Direction
            3.2.2 Action on other neurons
            3.2.3 Discharge patterns
            3.2.4 Classification by neurotransmitter production
    4 Connectivity
    5 Mechanisms for propagating action potentials
    6 Neural coding
    7 All-or-none principle
    8 History
        8.1 Neuron doctrine
    9 Neurons in the brain
    10 Neurological disorders
        10.1 Demyelination
        10.2 Axonal degeneration
    11 Nerve regeneration and Neurogenesis
    12 Computational power
    13 See also
    14 References
    15 Further reading
    16 External links


Overview

Structure of a typical neuron Neuron (peripheral nervous system) At one end of
an elongated structure is a branching mass. At the centre of this mass is the
nucleus and the branches are dendrites. A thick axon trails away from the mass,
ending with further branching which are labeled as axon terminals. Along the
axon are a number of protuberances labeled as myelin sheaths.

	Dendrite
	Soma
	Axon
	Nucleus
	Node of
	Ranvier
	Axon terminal
	Schwann cell
	Myelin sheath
	Anatomy of a multipolar neuron
	Animation in the reference.

A neuron is a specialized type of cell found in the bodies of all eumetozoans.
Only sponges and a few other simpler animals lack neurons. The features that
define a neuron are electrical excitability[4] and the presence of synapses,
which are complex membrane junctions that transmit signals to other cells. The
body's neurons, plus the glial cells that give them structural and metabolic
support, together constitute the nervous system. In vertebrates, the majority
of neurons belong to the central nervous system, but some reside in peripheral
ganglia, and many sensory neurons are situated in sensory organs such as the
retina and cochlea.

A typical neuron is divided into three parts: the soma or cell body, dendrites,
and axon. The soma is usually compact; the axon and dendrites are filaments
that extrude from it. Dendrites typically branch profusely, getting thinner
with each branching, and extending their farthest branches a few hundred
micrometers from the soma. The axon leaves the soma at a swelling called the
axon hillock, and can extend for great distances, giving rise to hundreds of
branches. Unlike dendrites, an axon usually maintains the same diameter as it
extends. The soma may give rise to numerous dendrites, but never to more than
one axon. Synaptic signals from other neurons are received by the soma and
dendrites; signals to other neurons are transmitted by the axon. A typical
synapse, then, is a contact between the axon of one neuron and a dendrite or
soma of another. Synaptic signals may be excitatory or inhibitory. If the net
excitation received by a neuron over a short period of time is large enough,
the neuron generates a brief pulse called an action potential, which originates
at the soma and propagates rapidly along the axon, activating synapses onto
other neurons as it goes.

Many neurons fit the foregoing schema in every respect, but there are also
exceptions to most parts of it. There are no neurons that lack a soma, but
there are neurons that lack dendrites, and others that lack an axon.
Furthermore, in addition to the typical axodendritic and axosomatic synapses,
there are axoaxonic (axon-to-axon) and dendrodendritic (dendrite-to-dendrite)
synapses.

The key to neural function is the synaptic signaling process, which is partly
electrical and partly chemical. The electrical aspect depends on properties of
the neuron's membrane. Like all animal cells, the cell body of every neuron is
enclosed by a plasma membrane, a bilayer of lipid molecules with many types of
protein structures embedded in it. A lipid bilayer is a powerful electrical
insulator, but in neurons, many of the protein structures embedded in the
membrane are electrically active. These include ion channels that permit
electrically charged ions to flow across the membrane, and ion pumps that
actively transport ions from one side of the membrane to the other. Most ion
channels are permeable only to specific types of ions. Some ion channels are
voltage gated, meaning that they can be switched between open and closed states
by altering the voltage difference across the membrane. Others are chemically
gated, meaning that they can be switched between open and closed states by
interactions with chemicals that diffuse through the extracellular fluid. The
interactions between ion channels and ion pumps produce a voltage difference
across the membrane, typically a bit less than 1/10 of a volt at baseline. This
voltage has two functions: first, it provides a power source for an assortment
of voltage-dependent protein machinery that is embedded in the membrane;
second, it provides a basis for electrical signal transmission between
different parts of the membrane.

Neurons communicate by chemical and electrical synapses in a process known as
neurotransmission, also called synaptic transmission. The fundamental process
that triggers the release of neurotransmitters is the action potential, a
propagating electrical signal that is generated by exploiting the electrically
excitable membrane of the neuron. This is also known as a wave of
depolarization.  Anatomy and histology Diagram of a typical myelinated
vertebrate motor neuron

Neurons are highly specialized for the processing and transmission of cellular
signals. Given their diversity of functions performed in different parts of the
nervous system, there is, as expected, a wide variety in their shape, size, and
electrochemical properties. For instance, the soma of a neuron can vary from 4
to 100 micrometers in diameter.[5]

* The soma is the body of the neuron. As it contains the nucleus, most protein
  synthesis occurs here. The nucleus can range from 3 to 18 micrometers in
  diameter.[6]

* The dendrites of a neuron are cellular extensions with many branches. This
  overall shape and structure is referred to metaphorically as a dendritic
  tree. This is where the majority of input to the neuron occurs via the
  dendritic spine.

* The axon is a finer, cable-like projection that can extend tens, hundreds, or
  even tens of thousands of times the diameter of the soma in length. The axon
  carries nerve signals away from the soma (and also carries some types of
  information back to it). Many neurons have only one axon, but this axon
  may—and usually will—undergo extensive branching, enabling communication with
  many target cells. The part of the axon where it emerges from the soma is
  called the axon hillock. Besides being an anatomical structure, the axon
  hillock is also the part of the neuron that has the greatest density of
  voltage-dependent sodium channels. This makes it the most easily excited part
  of the neuron and the spike initiation zone for the axon: in
  electrophysiological terms it has the most negative action potential
  threshold. While the axon and axon hillock are generally involved in
  information outflow, this region can also receive input from other neurons.

* The axon terminal contains synapses, specialized structures where
  neurotransmitter chemicals are released to communicate with target neurons.

The canonical view of the neuron attributes dedicated functions to its various
anatomical components; however dendrites and axons often act in ways contrary
to their so-called main function.

Axons and dendrites in the central nervous system are typically only about one
micrometer thick, while some in the peripheral nervous system are much thicker.
The soma is usually about 10–25 micrometers in diameter and often is not much
larger than the cell nucleus it contains. The longest axon of a human motor
neuron can be over a meter long, reaching from the base of the spine to the
toes.

Sensory neurons can have axons that run from the toes to the posterior column
of the spinal cord, over 1.5 meters in adults. Giraffes have single axons
several meters in length running along the entire length of their necks. Much
of what is known about axonal function comes from studying the squid giant
axon, an ideal experimental preparation because of its relatively immense size
(0.5–1 millimeters thick, several centimeters long).

Fully differentiated neurons are permanently postmitotic;[7] however, research
starting around 2002 shows that additional neurons throughout the brain can
originate from neural stem cells through the process of neurogenesis. These are
found throughout the brain, but are particularly concentrated in the
subventricular zone and subgranular zone.[8] Histology and internal structure
Golgi-stained neurons in human hippocampal tissue Actin filaments in a mouse
Cortical Neuron in culture

Numerous microscopic clumps called Nissl substance (or Nissl bodies) are seen
when nerve cell bodies are stained with a basophilic ("base-loving") dye. These
structures consist of rough endoplasmic reticulum and associated ribosomal RNA.
Named after German psychiatrist and neuropathologist Franz Nissl (1860–1919),
they are involved in protein synthesis and their prominence can be explained by
the fact that nerve cells are very metabolically active. Basophilic dyes such
as aniline or (weakly) haematoxylin [9] highlight negatively charged
components, and so bind to the phosphate backbone of the ribosomal RNA.

The cell body of a neuron is supported by a complex mesh of structural proteins
called neurofilaments, which are assembled into larger neurofibrils. Some
neurons also contain pigment granules, such as neuromelanin (a brownish-black
pigment that is byproduct of synthesis of catecholamines), and lipofuscin (a
yellowish-brown pigment), both of which accumulate with age.[10][11][12] Other
structural proteins that are important for neuronal function are actin and the
tubulin of microtubules. Actin is predominately found at the tips of axons and
dendrites during neuronal development.

There are different internal structural characteristics between axons and
dendrites. Typical axons almost never contain ribosomes, except some in the
initial segment. Dendrites contain granular endoplasmic reticulum or ribosomes,
in diminishing amounts as the distance from the cell body increases.

Classification
Image of pyramidal neurons in mouse cerebral cortex expressing green
fluorescent protein. The red staining indicates GABAergic interneurons.[13]

SMI32-stained pyramidal neurons in cerebral cortex
See also: List of distinct cell types in the adult human body § Nervous system

Neurons exist in a number of different shapes and sizes and can be classified
by their morphology and function.[14] The anatomist Camillo Golgi grouped
neurons into two types; type I with long axons used to move signals over long
distances and type II with short axons, which can often be confused with
dendrites. Type I cells can be further divided by where the cell body or soma
is located. The basic morphology of type I neurons, represented by spinal motor
neurons, consists of a cell body called the soma and a long thin axon covered
by the myelin sheath. Around the cell body is a branching dendritic tree that
receives signals from other neurons. The end of the axon has branching
terminals (axon terminal) that release neurotransmitters into a gap called the
synaptic cleft between the terminals and the dendrites of the next neuron.
Structural classification Polarity Different kinds of neurons: 1 Unipolar
neuron 2 Bipolar neuron 3 Multipolar neuron 4 Pseudounipolar neuron

Most neurons can be anatomically characterized as:

    Unipolar or pseudounipolar: dendrite and axon emerging from same process.
    Bipolar: axon and single dendrite on opposite ends of the soma.
    Multipolar: two or more dendrites, separate from the axon:
	Golgi I: neurons with long-projecting axonal processes; examples are
	         pyramidal cells, Purkinje cells, and anterior horn cells.
	Golgi II: neurons whose axonal process projects locally; the best
	         example is the granule cell.
    Anaxonic: where axon cannot be distinguished from dendrites.

Other

Furthermore, some unique neuronal types can be identified according to their
location in the nervous system and distinct shape. Some examples are:

* Basket cells, interneurons that form a dense plexus of terminals around the
  soma of target cells, found in the cortex and cerebellum.
* Betz cells, large motor neurons.
* Lugaro cells, interneurons of the cerebellum.
* Medium spiny neurons, most neurons in the corpus striatum.
* Purkinje cells, huge neurons in the cerebellum, a type of Golgi I multipolar
  neuron.
* Pyramidal cells, neurons with triangular soma, a type of Golgi I.
* Renshaw cells, neurons with both ends linked to alpha motor neurons.
* Unipolar brush cells, interneurons with unique dendrite ending in a
  brush-like tuft.
* Granule cells, a type of Golgi II neuron.
* Anterior horn cells, motoneurons located in the spinal cord.
* Spindle cells, interneurons that connect widely separated areas of the brain

Functional classification

Direction

* Afferent neurons convey information from tissues and organs into the central
  nervous system and are sometimes also called sensory neurons.
* Efferent neurons transmit signals from the central nervous system to the
  effector cells and are sometimes called motor neurons.
* Interneurons connect neurons within specific regions of the central nervous
  system.

Afferent and efferent also refer generally to neurons that, respectively, bring
information to or send information from the brain region.


Action on other neurons

A neuron affects other neurons by releasing a neurotransmitter that binds to
chemical receptors. The effect upon the postsynaptic neuron is determined not
by the presynaptic neuron or by the neurotransmitter, but by the type of
receptor that is activated. A neurotransmitter can be thought of as a key, and
a receptor as a lock: the same type of key can here be used to open many
different types of locks. Receptors can be classified broadly as excitatory
(causing an increase in firing rate), inhibitory (causing a decrease in firing
rate), or modulatory (causing long-lasting effects not directly related to
firing rate).

The two most common neurotransmitters in the brain, glutamate and GABA, have
actions that are largely consistent. Glutamate acts on several different types
of receptors, and have effects that are excitatory at ionotropic receptors and
a modulatory effect at metabotropic receptors. Similarly GABA acts on several
different types of receptors, but all of them have effects (in adult animals,
at least) that are inhibitory. Because of this consistency, it is common for
neuroscientists to simplify the terminology by referring to cells that release
glutamate as "excitatory neurons", and cells that release GABA as "inhibitory
neurons". Since over 90% of the neurons in the brain release either glutamate
or GABA, these labels encompass the great majority of neurons. There are also
other types of neurons that have consistent effects on their targets, for
example "excitatory" motor neurons in the spinal cord that release
acetylcholine, and "inhibitory" spinal neurons that release glycine.

The distinction between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters is not
absolute, however. Rather, it depends on the class of chemical receptors
present on the postsynaptic neuron. In principle, a single neuron, releasing a
single neurotransmitter, can have excitatory effects on some targets,
inhibitory effects on others, and modulatory effects on others still. For
example, photoreceptor cells in the retina constantly release the
neurotransmitter glutamate in the absence of light. So-called OFF bipolar cells
are, like most neurons, excited by the released glutamate. However, neighboring
target neurons called ON bipolar cells are instead inhibited by glutamate,
because they lack the typical ionotropic glutamate receptors and instead
express a class of inhibitory metabotropic glutamate receptors.[15] When light
is present, the photoreceptors cease releasing glutamate, which relieves the ON
bipolar cells from inhibition, activating them; this simultaneously removes the
excitation from the OFF bipolar cells, silencing them.

It is possible to identify the type of inhibitory effect a presynaptic neuron
will have on a postsynaptic neuron, based on the proteins the presynaptic
neuron expresses. Parvalbumin-expressing neurons typically dampen the output
signal of the postsynaptic neuron in the visual cortex, whereas
somatostatin-expressing neurons typically block dendritic inputs to the
postsynaptic neuron.[16] Discharge patterns

Neurons can be classified according to their electrophysiological characteristics:

* Tonic or regular spiking. Some neurons are typically constantly (or
  tonically) active. Example: interneurons in neurostriatum.
* Phasic or bursting. Neurons that fire in bursts are called phasic.
* Fast spiking. Some neurons are notable for their high firing rates, for
  example some types of cortical inhibitory interneurons, cells in globus
  pallidus, retinal ganglion cells.[17][18]

Classification by neurotransmitter production

* Cholinergic neurons—acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is released from presynaptic
  neurons into the synaptic cleft. It acts as a ligand for both ligand-gated
  ion channels and metabotropic (GPCRs) muscarinic receptors. Nicotinic
  receptors, are pentameric ligand-gated ion channels composed of alpha and
  beta subunits that bind nicotine. Ligand binding opens the channel causing
  influx of Na+ depolarization and increases the probability of presynaptic
  neurotransmitter release. Acetylcholine is synthesized from choline and
  acetyl coenzyme A.
* GABAergic neurons—gamma aminobutyric acid. GABA is one of two neuroinhibitors
  in the CNS, the other being Glycine. GABA has a homologous function to ACh,
  gating anion channels that allow Cl− ions to enter the post synaptic neuron.
  Cl− causes hyperpolarization within the neuron, decreasing the probability of
  an action potential firing as the voltage becomes more negative (recall that
  for an action potential to fire, a positive voltage threshold must be
  reached). GABA is synthesized from glutamate neurotransmitters by the enzyme
  glutamate decarboxylase.
* Glutamatergic neurons—glutamate. Glutamate is one of two primary excitatory
  amino acid neurotransmitter, the other being Aspartate. Glutamate receptors
  are one of four categories, three of which are ligand-gated ion channels and
  one of which is a G-protein coupled receptor (often referred to as GPCR).

	AMPA and Kainate receptors both function as cation channels permeable
	to Na+ cation channels mediating fast excitatory synaptic transmission

	NMDA receptors are another cation channel that is more permeable to
	Ca2+. The function of NMDA receptors is dependant on Glycine receptor
	binding as a co-agonist within the channel pore. NMDA receptors do not
	function without both ligands present.

	Metabotropic receptors, GPCRs modulate synaptic transmission and
	postsynaptic excitability.

	Glutamate can cause excitotoxicity when blood flow to the brain is
	interrupted, resulting in brain damage. When blood flow is suppressed,
	glutamate is released from presynaptic neurons causing NMDA and AMPA
	receptor activation more so than would normally be the case outside of
	stress conditions, leading to elevated Ca2+ and Na+ entering the post
	synaptic neuron and cell damage. Glutamate is synthesized from the
	amino acid glutamine by the enzyme glutamate synthase.

* Dopaminergic neurons—dopamine. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that acts on D1
  type (D1 and D5) Gs coupled receptors, which increase cAMP and PKA, and D2
  type (D2, D3, and D4) receptors, which activate Gi-coupled receptors that
  decrease cAMP and PKA. Dopamine is connected to mood and behavior, and
  modulates both pre and post synaptic neurotransmission. Loss of dopamine
  neurons in the substantia nigra has been linked to Parkinson's disease.
  Dopamine is synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine. Tyrosine is catalyzed
  into levadopa (or L-DOPA) by tyrosine hydroxlase, and levadopa is then
  converted into dopamine by amino acid decarboxylase.
* Serotonergic neurons—serotonin. Serotonin (5-Hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) can act
  as excitatory or inhibitory. Of the four 5-HT receptor classes, 3 are GPCR
  and 1 is ligand gated cation channel. Serotonin is synthesized from
  tryptophan by tryptophan hydroxylase, and then further by aromatic acid
  decarboxylase. A lack of 5-HT at postsynaptic neurons has been linked to
  depression. Drugs that block the presynaptic serotonin transporter are used
  for treatment, such as Prozac and Zoloft.

Connectivity

Main articles: Synapse and Chemical synapse

Chemical synapse

Neurons communicate with one another via synapses, where the axon terminal or
en passant bouton (a type of terminals located along the length of the axon) of
one cell contacts another neuron's dendrite, soma or, less commonly, axon.
Neurons such as Purkinje cells in the cerebellum can have over 1000 dendritic
branches, making connections with tens of thousands of other cells; other
neurons, such as the magnocellular neurons of the supraoptic nucleus, have only
one or two dendrites, each of which receives thousands of synapses. Synapses
can be excitatory or inhibitory and either increase or decrease activity in the
target neuron, respectively. Some neurons also communicate via electrical
synapses, which are direct, electrically conductive junctions between
cells.[citation needed]

In a chemical synapse, the process of synaptic transmission is as follows: when
an action potential reaches the axon terminal, it opens voltage-gated calcium
channels, allowing calcium ions to enter the terminal. Calcium causes synaptic
vesicles filled with neurotransmitter molecules to fuse with the membrane,
releasing their contents into the synaptic cleft. The neurotransmitters diffuse
across the synaptic cleft and activate receptors on the postsynaptic neuron.
High cytosolic calcium in the axon terminal also triggers mitochondrial calcium
uptake, which, in turn, activates mitochondrial energy metabolism to produce
ATP to support continuous neurotransmission.[19]

The human brain has a huge number of synapses. Each of the 1011 (one hundred
billion) neurons has on average 7,000 synaptic connections to other neurons. It
has been estimated that the brain of a three-year-old child has about 1015
synapses (1 quadrillion). This number declines with age, stabilizing by
adulthood. Estimates vary for an adult, ranging from 1014 to 5 x 1014 synapses
(100 to 500 trillion).[20] Mechanisms for propagating action potentials A
signal propagating down an axon to the cell body and dendrites of the next cell

In 1937, John Zachary Young suggested that the squid giant axon could be used
to study neuronal electrical properties.[21] Being larger than but similar in
nature to human neurons, squid cells were easier to study. By inserting
electrodes into the giant squid axons, accurate measurements were made of the
membrane potential.

The cell membrane of the axon and soma contain voltage-gated ion channels that
allow the neuron to generate and propagate an electrical signal (an action
potential). These signals are generated and propagated by charge-carrying ions
including sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), chloride (Cl−), and calcium (Ca2+).

There are several stimuli that can activate a neuron leading to electrical
activity, including pressure, stretch, chemical transmitters, and changes of
the electric potential across the cell membrane.[22] Stimuli cause specific
ion-channels within the cell membrane to open, leading to a flow of ions
through the cell membrane, changing the membrane potential.

Thin neurons and axons require less metabolic expense to produce and carry
action potentials, but thicker axons convey impulses more rapidly. To minimize
metabolic expense while maintaining rapid conduction, many neurons have
insulating sheaths of myelin around their axons. The sheaths are formed by
glial cells: oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system and Schwann cells
in the peripheral nervous system. The sheath enables action potentials to
travel faster than in unmyelinated axons of the same diameter, whilst using
less energy. The myelin sheath in peripheral nerves normally runs along the
axon in sections about 1 mm long, punctuated by unsheathed nodes of Ranvier,
which contain a high density of voltage-gated ion channels. Multiple sclerosis
is a neurological disorder that results from demyelination of axons in the
central nervous system.

Some neurons do not generate action potentials, but instead generate a graded
electrical signal, which in turn causes graded neurotransmitter release. Such
nonspiking neurons tend to be sensory neurons or interneurons, because they
cannot carry signals long distances.  Neural coding

Neural coding is concerned with how sensory and other information is
represented in the brain by neurons. The main goal of studying neural coding is
to characterize the relationship between the stimulus and the individual or
ensemble neuronal responses, and the relationships amongst the electrical
activities of the neurons within the ensemble.[23] It is thought that neurons
can encode both digital and analog information.[24] All-or-none principle

The conduction of nerve impulses is an example of an all-or-none response. In
other words, if a neuron responds at all, then it must respond completely.
Greater intensity of stimulation does not produce a stronger signal but can
produce a higher frequency of firing. There are different types of receptor
response to stimulus, slowly adapting or tonic receptors respond to steady
stimulus and produce a steady rate of firing. These tonic receptors most often
respond to increased intensity of stimulus by increasing their firing
frequency, usually as a power function of stimulus plotted against impulses per
second. This can be likened to an intrinsic property of light where to get
greater intensity of a specific frequency (color) there have to be more
photons, as the photons can't become "stronger" for a specific frequency.

There are a number of other receptor types that are called quickly adapting or
phasic receptors, where firing decreases or stops with steady stimulus;
examples include: skin when touched by an object causes the neurons to fire,
but if the object maintains even pressure against the skin, the neurons stop
firing. The neurons of the skin and muscles that are responsive to pressure and
vibration have filtering accessory structures that aid their function.

The pacinian corpuscle is one such structure. It has concentric layers like an
onion, which form around the axon terminal. When pressure is applied and the
corpuscle is deformed, mechanical stimulus is transferred to the axon, which
fires. If the pressure is steady, there is no more stimulus; thus, typically
these neurons respond with a transient depolarization during the initial
deformation and again when the pressure is removed, which causes the corpuscle
to change shape again. Other types of adaptation are important in extending the
function of a number of other neurons.[25] History Further information: History
of neuroscience Drawing by Camillo Golgi of a hippocampus stained using the
silver nitrate method Drawing of a Purkinje cell in the cerebellar cortex done
by Santiago Ramón y Cajal, demonstrating the ability of Golgi's staining method
to reveal fine detail

The term neuron was coined by the German anatomist Heinrich Wilhelm Waldeyer.
The neuron's place as the primary functional unit of the nervous system was
first recognized in the early 20th century through the work of the Spanish
anatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal.[26] Ramón y Cajal proposed that neurons were
discrete cells that communicated with each other via specialized junctions, or
spaces, between cells.[26] This became known as the neuron doctrine, one of the
central tenets of modern neuroscience.[26] To observe the structure of
individual neurons, Ramón y Cajal improved a silver staining process known as
Golgi's method, which had been developed by his rival, Camillo Golgi.[26]
Cajal's improvement, which involved a technique he called "double
impregnation", is still in use. The silver impregnation stains are an extremely
useful method for neuroanatomical investigations because, for reasons unknown,
it stains a very small percentage of cells in a tissue, so one is able to see
the complete micro structure of individual neurons without much overlap from
other cells in the densely packed brain.[27] Neuron doctrine

The neuron doctrine is the now fundamental idea that neurons are the basic
structural and functional units of the nervous system. The theory was put
forward by Santiago Ramón y Cajal in the late 19th century. It held that
neurons are discrete cells (not connected in a meshwork), acting as
metabolically distinct units.

Later discoveries yielded a few refinements to the simplest form of the
doctrine. For example, glial cells, which are not considered neurons, play an
essential role in information processing.[28] Also, electrical synapses are
more common than previously thought,[29] meaning that there are direct,
cytoplasmic connections between neurons. In fact, there are examples of neurons
forming even tighter coupling: the squid giant axon arises from the fusion of
multiple axons.[30]

Ramón y Cajal also postulated the Law of Dynamic Polarization, which states
that a neuron receives signals at its dendrites and cell body and transmits
them, as action potentials, along the axon in one direction: away from the cell
body.[31] The Law of Dynamic Polarization has important exceptions; dendrites
can serve as synaptic output sites of neurons[32] and axons can receive
synaptic inputs.[33] Neurons in the brain

The number of neurons in the brain varies dramatically from species to
species.[34] The human brain contains about 85-86 billion neurons,[34][35]of
which 16.3 billion are in the cerebral cortex and 69 billion in the
cerebellum.[35] By contrast, the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans has just
302 neurons, making it an ideal experimental subject as scientists have been
able to map all of the organism's neurons. The fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster, a common subject in biological experiments, has around 100,000
neurons and exhibits many complex behaviors. Many properties of neurons, from
the type of neurotransmitters used to ion channel composition, are maintained
across species, allowing scientists to study processes occurring in more
complex organisms in much simpler experimental systems.  Neurological disorders
Main article: Neurology

Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease (CMT), also known as hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy (HMSN), hereditary sensorimotor neuropathy and peroneal muscular
atrophy, is a heterogeneous inherited disorder of nerves (neuropathy) that is
characterized by loss of muscle tissue and touch sensation, predominantly in
the feet and legs but also in the hands and arms in the advanced stages of
disease. Presently incurable, this disease is one of the most common inherited
neurological disorders, with 37 in 100,000 affected.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), also known simply as Alzheimer's, is a
neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive cognitive deterioration
together with declining activities of daily living and neuropsychiatric
symptoms or behavioral changes. The most striking early symptom is loss of
short-term memory (amnesia), which usually manifests as minor forgetfulness
that becomes steadily more pronounced with illness progression, with relative
preservation of older memories. As the disorder progresses, cognitive
(intellectual) impairment extends to the domains of language (aphasia), skilled
movements (apraxia), and recognition (agnosia), and functions such as
decision-making and planning become impaired.

Parkinson's disease (PD), also known as Parkinson disease, is a degenerative
disorder of the central nervous system that often impairs the sufferer's motor
skills and speech. Parkinson's disease belongs to a group of conditions called
movement disorders. It is characterized by muscle rigidity, tremor, a slowing
of physical movement (bradykinesia), and in extreme cases, a loss of physical
movement (akinesia). The primary symptoms are the results of decreased
stimulation of the motor cortex by the basal ganglia, normally caused by the
insufficient formation and action of dopamine, which is produced in the
dopaminergic neurons of the brain. Secondary symptoms may include high level
cognitive dysfunction and subtle language problems. PD is both chronic and
progressive.

Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disease leading to fluctuating muscle
weakness and fatigability during simple activities. Weakness is typically
caused by circulating antibodies that block acetylcholine receptors at the
post-synaptic neuromuscular junction, inhibiting the stimulative effect of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Myasthenia is treated with immunosuppressants,
cholinesterase inhibitors and, in selected cases, thymectomy.  Demyelination
Guillain–Barré syndrome – demyelination

Demyelination is the act of demyelinating, or the loss of the myelin sheath
insulating the nerves. When myelin degrades, conduction of signals along the
nerve can be impaired or lost, and the nerve eventually withers. This leads to
certain neurodegenerative disorders like multiple sclerosis and chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.  Axonal degeneration

Although most injury responses include a calcium influx signaling to promote
resealing of severed parts, axonal injuries initially lead to acute axonal
degeneration, which is rapid separation of the proximal and distal ends within
30 minutes of injury. Degeneration follows with swelling of the axolemma, and
eventually leads to bead like formation. Granular disintegration of the axonal
cytoskeleton and inner organelles occurs after axolemma degradation. Early
changes include accumulation of mitochondria in the paranodal regions at the
site of injury. Endoplasmic reticulum degrades and mitochondria swell up and
eventually disintegrate. The disintegration is dependent on ubiquitin and
calpain proteases (caused by influx of calcium ion), suggesting that axonal
degeneration is an active process. Thus the axon undergoes complete
fragmentation. The process takes about roughly 24 hrs in the PNS, and longer in
the CNS. The signaling pathways leading to axolemma degeneration are currently
unknown.  Nerve regeneration and Neurogenesis Main articles: Neuroregeneration
and Neurogenesis

It has been demonstrated that neurogenesis can sometimes occur in the adult
vertebrate brain, a finding that led to controversy in 1999.[36] Later studies
of the age of human neurons suggest that this process occurs only for a
minority of cells, and a vast majority of neurons comprising the neocortex were
formed before birth and persist without replacement.[3]

It is often possible for peripheral axons to regrow if they are severed. Recent
studies have also shown that the body contains a variety of stem cell types
that have the capacity to differentiate into neurons. A report in Nature
suggested that researchers had found a way to transform human skin cells into
working nerve cells using a process called transdifferentiation in which "cells
are forced to adopt new identities".[37] Computational power

Historically it has been thought that neurons are relatively simple devices and
that the immense computational power of the brain comes from having a great
many of them. Indeed, artificial intelligence research has followed this line.
However, it is now becoming increasingly apparent that even single neurons can
perform complex computations.[38] See also

    Artificial neuron
    Bidirectional cell
    Biological neuron model
    List of neuroscience databases
    Neuroplasticity
    Growth cone

References

"neuron". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) "a nerve cell"; "by the late 20th century the term neuron was commoner [than neurone] ... and standard in scientific usage"
Wade, Nicholas (1999-10-15). "Brain may grow new cells daily". The New York Times.
Nowakowski, R. S. (2006). "Stable neuron numbers from cradle to grave". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103 (33): 12219–12220. doi:10.1073/pnas.0605605103.
Rutecki, PA. "Neuronal excitability: voltage-dependent currents and synaptic transmission.". Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology. 9: 195–211. doi:10.1097/00004691-199204010-00003. PMID 1375602.
Davies, Melissa (2002-04-09). "The Neuron: size comparison". Neuroscience: A journey through the brain. Retrieved 2009-06-20.
Chudler, Eric H. "Brain Facts and Figures". Neuroscience for Kids. Retrieved 2009-06-20.
Herrup K, Yang Y (2007). "Cell cycle regulation in the postmitotic neuron: oxymoron or new biology?". Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8 (5): 368–78. doi:10.1038/nrn2124. PMID 17453017.
Alvarez-Buylla A, Garcia-Verdugo JM (February 1, 2002). "Neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone". Journal of Neuroscience. 22 (3): 629–34. PMID 11826091. Retrieved 2009-06-20.
State Hospitals Bulletin. State Commission in Lunacy. 1897. p. 378.
Zecca, L; Gallorini, M; Schünemann, V; Trautwein, AX; Gerlach, M; Riederer, P; Vezzoni, P; Tampellini, D (March 2001). "Iron, neuromelanin and ferritin content in the substantia nigra of normal subjects at different ages: consequences for iron storage and neurodegenerative processes.". Journal of Neurochemistry. 76 (6): 1766–73. doi:10.1046/j.1471-4159.2001.00186.x. PMID 11259494.
Herrero, María Trinidad; Hirsch, Etienne C.; Kastner, Anne; Luquin, María Rosario; Javoy-Agid, France; Gonzalo, Luis M.; Obeso, José A.; Agid, Yves (1993). "Neuromelanin Accumulation with Age in Catecholaminergic Neurons from Macaca fascicularis Brainstem". Developmental Neuroscience. 15 (1): 37–48. doi:10.1159/000111315. PMID 7505739.
Brunk, UT; Terman, A (1 September 2002). "Lipofuscin: mechanisms of age-related accumulation and influence on cell function.". Free radical biology & medicine. 33 (5): 611–9. doi:10.1016/s0891-5849(02)00959-0. PMID 12208347.
Lee, Wei-Chung Allen; Huang, Hayden; Feng, Guoping; Sanes, Joshua R.; Brown, Emery N.; So, Peter T.; Nedivi, Elly (2006). "Dynamic Remodeling of Dendritic Arbors in GABAergic Interneurons of Adult Visual Cortex". PLoS Biology. 4 (2): e29. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040029. PMC 1318477Freely accessible. PMID 16366735. open access publication - free to read
Al, Martini, Frederic Et. Anatomy and Physiology' 2007 Ed.2007 Edition. Rex Bookstore, Inc. p. 288. ISBN 978-971-23-4807-5.
Gerber U (2003). "Metabotropic glutamate receptors in vertebrate retina". Doc Ophthalmol. 106 (1): 83–87. doi:10.1023/A:1022477203420. PMID 12675489.
Wilson, Nathan R.; Runyan, Caroline A.; Wang, Forea L.; Sur, Mriganka (2012). "Division and subtraction by distinct cortical inhibitory networks in vivo". Nature. 488 (7411): 343–8. doi:10.1038/nature11347. PMC 3653570Freely accessible. PMID 22878717.
Kolodin, YO; Veselovskaia, NN; Veselovsky, NS; Fedulova, SA. Ion conductances related to shaping the repetitive firing in rat retinal ganglion cells. Acta Physiologica Congress. Retrieved 2009-06-20.
"Ionic conductances underlying excitability in tonically firing retinal ganglion cells of adult rat". Ykolodin.50webs.com. 2008-04-27. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
Ivannikov, MV; Macleod, GT (Jun 4, 2013). "Mitochondrial free Ca²⁺ levels and their effects on energy metabolism in Drosophila motor nerve terminals". Biophysical Journal. 104 (11): 2353–61. doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2013.03.064. PMC 3672877Freely accessible. PMID 23746507.
Drachman D (2005). "Do we have brain to spare?". Neurology. 64 (12): 2004–5. doi:10.1212/01.WNL.0000166914.38327.BB. PMID 15985565.
Chudler, Eric H. "Milestones in Neuroscience Research". Neuroscience for Kids. Retrieved 2009-06-20.
Patlak, Joe; Gibbons, Ray (2000-11-01). "Electrical Activity of Nerves". Action Potentials in Nerve Cells. Archived from the original on August 27, 2009. Retrieved 2009-06-20.
Brown EN, Kass RE, Mitra PP (2004). "Multiple neural spike train data analysis: State-of-the-art and future challenges". Nature Neuroscience. 7 (5): 456–61. doi:10.1038/nn1228. PMID 15114358.
Thorpe, SJ (1990) Spike arrival times: A highly efficient coding scheme for neural networks. In R. Eckmiller, G. Hartmann, & G. Hauske (Eds.) Parallel processing in neural systems, Elsevier, pp. 91–94 ISBN 0444883908
Eckert, Roger; Randall, David (1983). Animal physiology: mechanisms and adaptations. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman. p. 239. ISBN 0-7167-1423-X.
López-Muñoz, F.; Boya, J.; Alamo, C. (16 October 2006). "Neuron theory, the cornerstone of neuroscience, on the centenary of the Nobel Prize award to Santiago Ramón y Cajal". Brain Research Bulletin. 70 (4–6): 391–405. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.07.010. PMID 17027775.
Grant, Gunnar; Boya, J; Alamo, C (2007). "How the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was shared between Golgi and Cajal". Brain Research Reviews. 55 (4–6): 490–8. doi:10.1016/j.brainresrev.2006.11.004. PMID 17306375.
Witcher M, Kirov S, Harris K (2007). "Plasticity of perisynaptic astroglia during synaptogenesis in the mature rat hippocampus". Glia. 55 (1): 13–23. doi:10.1002/glia.20415. PMID 17001633.
Connors B, Long M (2004). "Electrical synapses in the mammalian brain". Annu Rev Neurosci. 27 (1): 393–418. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131128. PMID 15217338.
Guillery, R. W. (2005). "Observations of synaptic structures: Origins of the neuron doctrine and its current status". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 360 (1458): 1281–1307. doi:10.1098/rstb.2003.1459. PMC 1569502Freely accessible. PMID 16147523.
Sabbatini R.M.E. April–July 2003. Neurons and Synapses: The History of Its Discovery. Brain & Mind Magazine, 17. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
Djurisic M, Antic S, Chen W, Zecevic D (2004). "Voltage imaging from dendrites of mitral cells: EPSP attenuation and spike trigger zones". J Neurosci. 24 (30): 6703–14. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0307-04.2004. PMID 15282273.
Cochilla, AJ; Alford, S (1997). "Glutamate receptor-mediated synaptic excitation in axons of the lamprey". The Journal of Physiology. 499 (Pt 2): 443–57. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1997.sp021940. PMC 1159318Freely accessible. PMID 9080373.
Williams RW, Herrup K (1988). "The control of neuron number". Annual Review of Neuroscience. 11 (1): 423–53. doi:10.1146/annurev.ne.11.030188.002231. PMID 3284447.
Azevedo FA, Carvalho LR, Grinberg LT, et al. (April 2009). "Equal numbers of neuronal and nonneuronal cells make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain". The Journal of Comparative Neurology. 513 (5): 532–41. doi:10.1002/cne.21974. PMID 19226510.
Wadep, Nicholas (1999-10-15). "Brain may grow new cells daily". The New York Times. Retrieved 2013-02-16.
Callaway, Ewen (26 May 2011). "How to make a human neuron". NatureNews. doi:10.1038/news.2011.328. "By transforming cells from human skin into working nerve cells, researchers may have come up with a model for nervous-system diseases and perhaps even regenerative therapies based on cell transplants. The achievement, reported online today in Nature, is the latest in a fast-moving field called transdifferentiation, in which cells are forced to adopt new identities. In the past year, researchers have converted connective tissue cells found in skin into heart cells, blood cells and liver cells."

    Forrest MD (2014). "Intracellular Calcium Dynamics Permit a Purkinje Neuron Model to Perform Toggle and Gain Computations Upon its Inputs". Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience. 8: 86. doi:10.3389/fncom.2014.00086. PMC 4138505Freely accessible. PMID 25191262.

Further reading

    Kandel E.R., Schwartz, J.H., Jessell, T.M. 2000. Principles of Neural Science, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York.
    Bullock, T.H., Bennett, M.V.L., Johnston, D., Josephson, R., Marder, E., Fields R.D. 2005. The Neuron Doctrine, Redux, Science, V.310, p. 791–793.
    Ramón y Cajal, S. 1933 Histology, 10th ed., Wood, Baltimore.
    Richard S. Snell: Clinical neuroanatomy (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Ed.6th 2006) Philadelphia, Baltimore, New York, London. ISBN 978-963-226-293-2
    Roberts A., Bush B.M.H. 1981. Neurones Without Impulses. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
    Peters, A., Palay, S.L., Webster, H, D., 1991 The Fine Structure of the Nervous System, 3rd ed., Oxford, New York


